Green-Noise Digital Halftoning

DANIEL L. LAU, GONZALO R. ARCE, SENIOR MEMBER, IEEE,

AND NEAL C. GALLAGHER, FELLOW, IEEE

In this paper, we introduce the concept of green noise-the size depending on the tone being rendered [2]. With the

midfrequency component of white noise-and its advantages over advent of digital image setters (the device which converts

blue noise for digital halftoning. Unlike blue-noise dither patterns, the original continuous-tone image to binary bitmap and

which are composed exclusively of isolated pixels, green-noise then from electronic form to physical), printing has been

dither patterns are composed of pixel-clusters making them less susceptible to image degradation from nonideal printing artifacts rapidly moving to digital binary methods [3]. Originally,

such as dot-gain. Although they are not the only techniques which these digital methods attempted to imitate photomechanical

generate clustered halftones, error-diffusion with output-dependent screening methods [4] through clustered dot dithering.

feedback and variations based on filter weight perturbation are This type of digital halftoning is referred to as amplitude shown to be good generators of green noise, thereby allowing for modulated (AM) screening.

tunable coarseness. Using statistics developed for blue noise, we closely examine the spectral content of resulting dither patterns.

As an alternative to AM screening, frequency modulated

We introduce two spatial-domain statistics for analyzing the spatial (FM) or stochastic screening techniques, where dots are

arrangement of pixels in aperiodic dither patterns, because green-of constant size but are variably spaced according to

noise patterns may be anisotropic, and therefore spectral statistics tone, are available to digital printers. Although relatively based on radial averages may be inappropriate for the study of rare in commercial printing [5], FM screening avoids the

these patterns.

problems associated with AM methods [4] such as moire,

Keywords- Blue-noise dithering, clustered point process, dig-the interference pattern created by superimposing two or

ital halftoning, green-noise dithering, point process, stochastic geometry.

more regular patterns. Moire, a problem associated with

color printing, is minimized in commercial printers by

offsetting the orientation of the halftone screen of each

I.





INTRODUCTION


color-creating a desirable circular pattern called a rosette.

With the ultimate goal of accurately reproducing an

Great care must be taken when aligning these screens;

original continuous-tone photograph without loss of tonal

otherwise, moire will result [2]. A further drawback of

value or detail, printing devices such as those which rely on AM screening is image contouring, a visual banding effect

dye sublimation or gravure printing have been developed

created by an abruptly changing halftone texture. This

that are capable of rendering continuous tone. More often

artifact is minimized in AM patterns by increasing the

though, printing devices are capable of only limited-tone

maximum number of gray levels that a cluster can represent, reproduction, and in the case of binary output, intermediate but in order to increase the number of achievable gray

tones are represented as halftones. Examples of such de-

levels, the total number of pixels that compose a cluster

vices are laser and ink-jet printers and facsimile machines.1

must also be increased-reducing the spatial resolution of

In commercial printing, three printing processes that

the resulting halftone image.2

produce binary tone are letterpress or relief printing, lithog-The alternative screening technique, FM screening, elimi-

raphy or planographic printing, and screen or porous print-

nates the need for screen angles and screen rulings, resulting ing. These printing processes have, in the past, relied on

in an image without artifacts and displaying higher spatial analog photomechanical screening methods with halftones

resolution; furthermore, FM screens, by using a statistical consisting of rows of dots fixed along a grid in a regular

analysis of neighboring pixels, can represent images with

pattern, equally spaced center-to-center. These dots vary in greater fidelity [4]. The major drawback of FM screens is

Manuscript received February 11, 1998; revised October 5, 1998.

dot gain-the increase in size of the printed dot relative

The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer to the intended dot size of the original halftone film.

Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19717 USA.

Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9219(98)09351-7.

1 Although current technology regarding laser and ink-jet printers does 2 By dividing a large halftone cell (the sample area belonging to a allow for multilevel output, the number of achievable gray levels is still single cluster of an AM pattern) into smaller cells, thereby creating a too limited to eliminate quantization effects, and in these cases, halftones conglomerate or super cell [6], AM halftone patterns can represent the are still required in order to produce a sufficient range of intermediate same number of gray levels but with greater spatial resolution as the size tones [1].

of individual clusters is decreased.

0018-9219/98$10.00  1998 IEEE

2424

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





When printing halftones, dot gain creates a reduction or

because it does not clash with the structure of an

compression in the printed tonal range leading to a loss of image by adding one of its own or degrade it by

definition and detail (contrast); furthermore, dot gain can being too "noisy" or uncorrelated.

lead to "plugged" or filled-in screens and cause a shift in Therefore compared to dispersed-dot ordered dither, error

color [7].

diffusion creates patterns which are visually more pleasing.

Due to the nature of dot gain, FM screens will typically

By adding an output-dependent feedback term to er-

suffer greater amounts of distortion than AM [4], but it

ror diffusion, Levien [11] has shown that pixels can be

is not the amount of dot gain which limits the use of

clustered, forming a stochastic screen which maintains

FM halftoning. Instead, it is the reproducibility of the

properties of both the AM and FM screens. Furthermore,

printed dot. In a repeatable process where the variation

by adjusting a single parameter, Levien has demonstrated

in dot size/shape from printed dot-to-printed dot is small, the ability to increase or decrease the amount of cluster-printing can rely on dot gain compensation techniques

ing, thereby allowing for a tunable screen which can be

to minimize introduced distortion, but in a nonrepeatable

optimized according to the reliability of an imaging system process where the variation in dot size/shape is high, pattern to print individual pixels. In this paper we show that the

robustness (clustering) becomes a desired, and in many

spectral characteristics of these new patterns are not blue-cases a required, characteristic of the halftoning process [8].

noise like traditional error-diffusion halftones but green, In summary, the choice between AM and FM screens is a

i.e., containing no low-frequency or high-frequency spectral function of the imaging system's ability to print individual components.

pixels. If individual pixels can be reliably reproduced, the Introducing the green-noise model to digital halftoning is

halftone can be based on individual pixels. Otherwise, the

the primary focus of this paper. Because of the tunability of halftone must be composed of groups of pixels which,

AM-FM hybrids to create varying amounts of clustering,

through clustering, form larger features that can be reliably green noise, as presented here, is a tunable model with

reproduced [3].

blue noise as a limiting case. In addition to introducing

In this paper, we look at AM-FM hybrids, stochastic

a new statistical model for digital halftoning, this paper

halftoning techniques which create minority pixel clusters

also introduces new spatial statistics for the evaluation of which vary, according to tone, in both their size and

produced patterns. Previously, statistics for the analysis

spacing. The advantage to using these techniques is that

of binary halftone patterns have been based on spectral

as stochastic processes, the superposition of two or more

domain estimates. These spectral statistics are responsible halftone patterns does not create moire, thereby alleviating for the name "blue noise" given to stochastic patterns

the need for screen angles; furthermore, by clustering

created via error-diffusion and for the name "green noise"

minority pixels, AM-FM hybrids are also less susceptible

for AM-FM hybrid patterns. Like the spectral statistics,

to the effects of dot gain. Techniques which fall in this

the newly introduced spatial statistics uniquely identify the category are not new to halftoning literature and include

spatial characteristics inherent in a particular halftoning such techniques as Velho's and Gomes' digital halftoning

process; furthermore, being based in the spatial domain,

along space-filling curves (SFC's) [9], Scheermesser's and

these new statistics have interpretations which are far more Bryngdahl's digital halftoning with texture control [10], and intuitive to the viewer.

Levien's error diffusion with output-dependent feedback

[11]. For reasons to be discussed later, this paper focuses on II. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF DIGITAL HALFTONES

Levien's technique, but the presented aspects of AM-FM

halftoning will apply to many of the halftoning schemes

A. Spectral Statistics

not presented.

In order to provide a mechanism for studying aperiodic

In order to introduce this new screen, consider first the

patterns, Ulichney [12] developed the radially averaged

implementations of AM and FM halftoning. The clustering

power spectra along with a measure of anisotropy. Both

of pixels in AM screens has always implied using clustered-

rely on estimating the power spectrum through Bartlett's

dot dithering techniques for transforming continuous-tone

method of averaging periodograms, i.e., the magnitude-

images to binary form. FM screens, until recently, have

square of the Fourier transform of the output pattern divided always implied dispersed-dot ordered dithering. Studied in

by the sample size, to produce the spectral estimate

.

great detail by Ulichney [12], error diffusion creates dither Although anisotropies of a dither pattern can be qualita-patterns which are most pleasant in areas of uniform tone

tively observed by studying three-dimensional (3-D) plots

when these patterns have isotropic (radially symmetric)

of

, partitioning the spectral domain into a series of

blue noise3 spectral characteristics. Ulichney writes the

annular rings

of width

, as shown in Fig. 1, leads

following on the subject [12].

to two useful one-dimensional (1-D) statistics. The first

The purpose of a dither pattern is to represent a

statistic is the radially averaged power spectrum density

continuous-tone level. It therefore should not have

(RAPSD)

, defined for discrete

as the average

any form or structure of its own; a pattern succeeds

power in the annular ring with center radius

when it is innocuous. Blue noise is visually pleasant

(1)

3 Blue noise refers to the high-frequency component of white noise.

Such patterns have a minimal low-frequency spectral component.

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2425





B. Spatial Statistics

Though spectral domain techniques have been proposed,

statisticians are more likely to rely on "nearest-neighbor"

distributions, i.e., the distribution of points relative to a typical point. Several nearest-neighbor measures are ex-tremely useful to halftoning, and in this paper we show

two such spatial-statistic metrics which can be very useful in characterizing halftone patterns. We begin with a more

concise definition of a point process.

The point process

is a stochastic model governing the

location of events, or points

, within the space

[13].

is a sample of

and will be written as

. Furthermore,

is a scalar quantity defined

Fig. 1.

By partitioning the spectral domain into a series of annular as the number of

in the subset

of

. We assume that

rings, the power spectrum P (f ) can be studied using P (f) and A(f

the point process

is simple, meaning that

implies

).

, which further implies

where

is the number of frequency samples in

for

(3)

. The second statistic is the anisotropy

. It is

else

defined as

where

is the infinitesimally small area around

. In

terms of a discrete dither pattern,

represents the set of

minority pixels such that

, for pixel index

(2)

indicates a minority pixel at location

.

now represents

an aperiodic halftone process with

and

representing

blue-noise and green-noise halftoning processes, respec-

the relative variance or the "noise-to-signal" ratio [12] of tively.

frequency samples of

in

.

From its definition in (3),

is a scalar random vari-

Built on the premise that aperiodic patterns generated

able which can be characterized in terms of its moments.

in areas of uniform gray are most pleasant when patterns

We start with the first-order moment, the intensity

are isotropic,

, a measure of how isotropic a dither

pattern is, implies that the pattern with lower anisotropy is (4)

the more visually pleasing of the two if both patterns have identical

. Given that its purpose is to measure the

For a point process to be stationary, the statistical character-strength of directional artifacts,

does not indicate the

istics of

must be invariant to translation. If a process is

direction. It is therefore possible for a dither pattern with stationary, then the intensity is constant for all

strong horizontal artifacts to be indistinguishable according where

is the expected number of points per

to

and

from a pattern with strong diagonal

unit area. Furthermore,

represents the unconditional

artifacts. The human eye being less sensitive to diagonal

probability that the sample at location

is a minority pixel.

correlations, one may find the difference in appearance far We gain additional insight into

by conditioning the

from indistinguishable.

probability distribution of

given that a point lies at a given

Note that for either statistic, a rotation in the original

location. The result is a conditional distribution referred to dither pattern has no effect on either

or

, and

as the Palm distribution [14]. A particular measure under

these metrics may therefore be insufficient at describing

the Palm distribution of

is the quantity

(or for

patterns uniquely when patterns are allowed and even pre-

discrete space

)

ferred to be anisotropic. Additional information pertaining to the direction of artifacts may then be required. In order to supplement

and

, we can use spatial domain

(5)

statistics to characterize aperiodic dither patterns. Though largely ignored in halftone literature, the importance of

the ratio of the expected number of points in

under the

spatial domain statistics cannot be overlooked. Found in

condition

to the unconditional expected number of

the literature of stochastic geometry (the area interested

points in

.

, referred to as the reduced second-

in modeling complicated geometrical patterns), point pro-

moment measure, may be thought of as the influence at

cesses have long been studied by statisticians to model such location

of the point . That is, is a point at

more or less

things as crystal formation in granite and cell locations

likely to occur because a point exists at

? For stationary

within organic tissue. Because point process statistics are processes,

may be written as

where

is

used to model the location of random points in space, they

the distance between

and

while

is the direction to

are suited perfectly for characterizing digital halftones.

from

. For a point process to be isotropic, the statistical

2426

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





Fig. 2.

By dividing the spatial domain into a series of (left)

annular rings centered around location y, the spatial arrangement of points can be studied through the use of R(r), and by looking at the expected number of points per unit area in the segment 0ay versus the ring 0y, the spatial arrangement can be studied using Dr ;r (a).

characteristics of

must be invariant to rotation; therefore,

if

is also isotropic, then

.

From

, we can derive two spatial domain statistics

in a similar fashion to

and

by partitioning

the spatial domain into a series of annular rings

(Fig. 2), with center radius

, width

, and centered

around location

. In this paper, the annular ring

(a)

will be the set

where

. The first statistic for stationary and isotropic

is the pair correlation

, defined as

(6)

the influence that the point at

has at any

in the annular

ring

. Note that for a stationary point process, the

unconditional expected number of points in the ring

is

(the intensity times the area of

).

is also the average value of

in the ring

, and

its usefulness can be seen in the interpretation that maxima of

indicate frequent occurrences of the interpoint

distance

while minima of

indicate an inhibition of

points at

[14].

In addition to the above spatial interpretations,

maintains an intimate link with the spectral domain. In

particular, a frequent occurrence of the interpoint distance

, indicated by maxima in

, implies a peak in

for radial frequency

proportional in magnitude

to the peak in

, meaning that a larger peak leads

to a larger peak in

. Take for instance white-noise

(b)

halftoning where binary patterns are created by thresholding Fig. 3.

Dither pattern, pair correlation and directional distribution an input image with uniformly distributed, uncorrelated

function of (a) a dither pattern with small variation in cluster shape and (b) a dither pattern with high variation in cluster shape.

(white) noise.

Deriving its name from its spectral content, white-noise

halftones have a

which is flat for all

. The lack of

measure

any spectral peaks implies that white-noise halftones have

a pair correlation which is one for all . This is the case

(7)

since a completely random,4 stationary, and isotropic point process with intensity

has a reduced second moment

for all

, and since

is the average

in

the ring

for all

for all

.

4 This is a completely random process if Ef(dV

In cases where

is stationary but not isotropic,

x) j y 2 g =

Ef(dVx)g for all y 6= x; y 2 <.

can be used to investigate anisotropy in

by defining the

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2427





Fig. 5.

The spectral characteristics of a blue-noise halftone pat-

tern in units of 2g = g(1 0 g) with: (a) a low-frequency cutoff at principle frequency fb; (b) a sharp transition region; and (c) a flat high-frequency blue-noise region.

Fig. 6.

The pair correlation for a blue-noise process showing: (a)

a strong inhibition of minority pixels near r = 0; (b) a decreasing correlation of minority pixels with increasing r; and (c) a frequent occurrence of the interpoint distance b indicated by a series of peaks at integer multiples of b.

(a)

Fig. 7.

Floyd-Steinberg filter weights.

the expected number of points per unit area in a segment

of the ring

, centered

around the point

such that

(see Fig. 2), to the expected number of points per unit

area in

itself. Note that for isotropic point patterns,

for all , and that

indicates

a favoring of points at angles near

while

indicates an inhibition of points. Furthermore, the

parameters

and

allow us to look at point distributions

for various ranges from a point

. Most notably, a near

distribution for the range

, a far distribution for

, and an overall distribution for

.

Compared to the spectral statistics

and

, the

spatial statistics

and

together offer a more

intuitive understanding of the underlying point process

.

This is perhaps best witnessed in Fig. 3 where minority

pixels form clusters. In this case, clustering results in a nonzero pair correlation for

near zero with

occurring at

. This parameter

is

proportional to the size of clusters as

. That

is, the area covered by the average sized cluster of

(b)

pixels is equal to the area covered a circle of radius

.

Fig. 4.

Blue-noise halftone of (a) a grayscale image and (b) a

Furthermore, the peaks of

, which occur at integer

grayscale ramp.

multiples of

, indicate that pixel clusters are

directional distribution function

as

separated center-to-center by an average distance of

with

the sharpness of peaks inversely proportional to the amount (8)

of variation in cluster size. Fig. 3(a) and (b) shows that

when the variation in cluster size and shape is small, the

2428

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





(a)

(b)

Fig. 8.

Analysis of blue-noise halftone patterns for (a) g = 1=16 and (b) g = 1=8.

pair correlation has very sharp peaks, while large variations image such that pixels are separated by an average distance lead to a pair correlation which is blurred (lower contrast between maxima and minima).

for

(9)

for

III.

BLUE-NOISE HALFTONING

Blue-noise halftoning, labeled as

and demonstrated

where

is the minimum distance between addressable

in Fig. 4, is characterized by a distribution of binary pixels points on the display [12], [15]. The parameter

is

where the minority pixels are spread as homogeneously

referred to as the principle wavelength of blue noise, with as possible [12]. Distributing pixels in this manner cre-its relationship to

justified by several intuitive properties.

ates a pattern which is aperiodic, isotropic, and does not

i) As the gray value approaches perfect white

contain any low-frequency spectral components. The result

or perfect black

, the principle wavelength

of halftoning a continuous-tone discrete-space monochrome

approaches infinity.

image with blue noise is a pattern which, as Ulichney [12]

ii) Wavelength decreases symmetrically with equal de-

describes, "is 'pleasant'-it (blue noise) does not clash with viations from black and white toward middle gray

the structure of an image by adding one of its own, or

.

degrade it by being too 'noisy' or uncorrelated."

iii) The square of the wavelength is inversely propor-

tional to the number of minority pixels per unit

A. Spectral Statistics

area.

Blue noise, when applied to an image of constant gray

Again we note that the distribution of minority pixels is

level , spreads the minority pixels of the resulting binary assumed to be stationary and isotropic.

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2429





Fig. 10.

The spectral characteristics of a green-noise halftone

pattern in units of 2g = g(1 0 g) with: (a) little or no low frequency spectral components; (b) high-frequency spectral components which diminish with increased clustering; and (c) a spectral peak at f = fg.

Fig. 11.

The pair correlation for green noise showing: (a) pixel

clustering with cluster radius rc; (b) decreasing influence as r increases; and (c) the green-noise principle wavelength g.

(a)

frequency spectral components; 2) a flat, high-frequency

(blue-noise) spectral region; and 3) a spectral peak at cutoff frequency

, the blue-noise principle frequency, such that

for

(10)

for

As will be the convention for this paper, the principle

frequency is indicated in Fig. 5 by a diamond located along the horizontal axis. Also note that

is plotted in units

of

, the variance of an individual pixel in

.

B. Spatial Statistics

In view of Fig. 5, we can begin to characterize blue-noise

halftones in terms of the pair correlation

by noting

that:

1) few or no neighboring pixels lie within a radius of

;

2) for

, the expected number of minority pixels

per unit area approaches

with increasing ;

3) the average number of minority pixels within the

radius

increases sharply near

.

The resulting pair correlation for blue noise is therefore

of the form in Fig. 6 where

shows: 1) a strong

inhibition of minority pixels5 near

; 2) a decreasing

correlation of minority pixels with increasing

; and 3)

(b)

a frequent occurrence of the interpoint distance

, the

Fig. 9.

Green-noise halftone of (a) a grayscale image and (b) a

principle wavelength, indicated by a series of peaks at

grayscale ramp.

integer multiples of

. Similar to

, the principle

wavelength is indicated in Fig. 6 with a diamond located

Turning to the spectral domain, the spectral characteris-

along the horizontal axis.

tics of blue noise in terms of

are shown in Fig. 5 and

5 Such processes are commonly referred to as hard-core, where no two can be described by three unique features: 1) little or no low points of are within some distance r of each other.

2430

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





Fig. 12.

Error diffusion with hysteresis algorithm.

Fig. 13.

An arrangement of two hystereses and two er-

ror-diffusion coefficients.

(a)

Fig. 14.

Green-noise halftones of a grayscale ramp using two

hystereses and two error coefficients with H = 1 and a left-to-right raster scan.

(b)

Fig. 15.

Green-noise halftones of a grayscale ramp using two

C. Error Diffusion

hystereses and two error coefficients with: (a) H = 1=2 and (b) H = 1=2 with 50% random error filter weights.

Although the original error-diffusion algorithm of Floyd

and Steinberg [16] does create blue-noise patterns, Ulichney clude using a serpentine scan, randomized weight positions,

[12] shows that with some variations, error diffusion is

and perturbed threshold. Another variation of particular

an improved generator of blue noise. These variations in-

importance involves perturbing the filter weights instead

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2431





(a)

(b)

Fig. 16.

Green-noise halftone statistics for: (a) g = 1=4 and (b) g = 1=2 using two hystereses and two error coefficients with H = 1=2.

of the threshold. This perturbation of filter weights is

benefits from aperiodic, uncorrelated structure without low-accomplished by first pairing weights of comparable value.

frequency graininess, but unlike blue, green-noise patterns Then for each pair of weights, a scaled random value

exhibit clustering.6 The result is a frequency content which is added to one and subtracted from the other. In order

lacks the high-frequency component characteristic of blue

to prevent negative values, the maximum noise amplitude

noise. Hence the term "green." Furthermore, green noise

(100%) is the value of the smaller weight in each pair.

forms aperiodic patterns that are not necessarily radially

Using the Floyd-Steinberg filter weights (Fig. 7), Ulich-

symmetric. Since the contrast sensitivity function of the

ney shows that perturbing each of the two pairs (7/16, 5/16) human visual system is not radially symmetric, we allow

and (3/16,1/16) creates a good blue-noise process. In partic-green noise to have asymmetric characteristics. The objec-

ular, adding 50% noise to each pair appears to optimize the tive is to combine the maximum dispersion attributes of

tradeoff between graininess and stable texture [12]. Fig. 8

blue noise with that of clustering of AM halftone patterns.

shows the resulting spatial and spectral characteristics for Point process statisticians have long described cluster

and

using this scheme.

processes such as those seen in green noise by examining

the cluster process in terms of two separate processes: 1)

IV. GREEN-NOISE HALFTONING

Just as blue noise is the high-frequency component of

6 The use of the word cluster refers to a collection of consecutive four-white noise, green noise, labeled as

and demonstrated

neighborhood pixels all of the same value. The definition is the same as in Fig. 9, is the mid-frequency component which, like blue, that used in [17] for a clump of marked vertices in a square lattice.

2432

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





(a)

(b)

Fig. 17.

Green-noise halftone statistics for: (a) g = 1=4 and (b) g = 1=2 using two hystereses and two error coefficients with H = 1=2 and 50% random error filter weights.

the parent process which describes the location of clusters7

by

, relative to the origin, as

and 2) the daughter process, which describes the shape

(11)

of clusters. In AM halftoning, clusters are placed along

a regular lattice, and therefore variations in AM patterns

and then defining

as the th sample cluster for

occur in the cluster shape. In FM halftoning, cluster shape

, a sample

of the green-noise halftone process

is deterministic, i.e., a single pixel. It is the location of is defined as

clusters that is of interest in characterizing FM patterns.

Green-noise patterns, having variation in both cluster shape and cluster location, require an analysis which looks at both (12)

the parent and daughter processes.

the sum of

translated clusters. The overall operation is

Looking first at the parent process

represents a

to replace each point of the parent sample

of process

single sample of the parent process such that

with its own cluster

of process

.

where

is the total number of clusters.

In order to derive a relationship between the total number

For the daughter process

represents a single sample

of clusters, the size of clusters, and the gray level of a binary cluster of

such that

where

dither pattern,

is defined as the binary dither pattern

is the number of minority pixels in cluster

. By first

resulting from halftoning a continuous-tone discrete-space

defining the translation or shift in space

of a set

monochrome image of constant gray level , and

is

7 The location being defined as the centroid of all points within the defined as the binary pixel of

with pixel index

. From

cluster.

the definition of

as the total number of points of

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2433





in

,

is the scalar quantity representing the total

number of minority pixels in

, and

is the total

number of clusters in

with

. The intensity

being the expected number of minority pixels per unit

area now can be written as

for

(13)

for

the ratio of the total number of minority pixels in

to

, the total number of pixels composing

. Given

(13),

, the average number of minority pixels per cluster

in

is

(14)

the total number of minority pixels in

divided by the

total number of clusters in

.

A. Spectral Statistics

Although obvious, (14) shows the very important rela-

tionship between the total number of clusters, the average

size of clusters, and the intensity for

. AM halftoning is

the limiting case where

is held constant for varying

, while FM halftoning is the limiting case where

is held

constant for varying

. In addition, (14) says that the total

(a)

number of clusters per unit area is proportional to

.

For isolated minority pixels (blue noise), the square of the average separation between minority pixels (

) is inversely

proportional to , the average number of minority pixels per unit area [12]. By determining the proportionality constant using

for

, the relationship between

and

is determined as

.

In green noise, it is the minority pixel clusters which

are distributed as homogeneously as possible, leading to an average separation (center-to-center) between clusters

whose squares are inversely proportional to the average

number of minority pixel clusters per unit area

. Using

the fact that

, the proportionality constant

can be determined such that

is defined as

for

(15)

for

the green-noise principle wavelength. This implies that the parent process

is itself a blue-noise point process with

intensity

.

Assuming that the variation in cluster size is small for

a given

, this placement of clusters





apart leads to a


strong spectral peak in


at

, the green-noise

principle frequency

for

(b)

(16)

for

Fig. 18.

Green-noise halftones of a grayscale ramp using two

hystereses and two error coefficients with: (a) H = 1 and (b) From (16) we make several intuitive observations: 1) as

H = 1 with 75% random hysteresis filter weights.

the average size of clusters increases,

approaches DC

and 2) as the size of clusters decreases,

approaches

frequency spectral components; 2) high-frequency spectral

. Fig. 10 illustrates the desired characteristics of

components which diminish with increased clustering; and

for

showing three distinct features: 1) little or no low-

3) a spectral peak at

.

2434

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





(a)

(b)

Fig. 19.

Green-noise halftone statistics for: (a) g = 1=4 and (b) g = 1=2 using two hystereses and two error coefficients with H = 1.

The sharpness of the spectral peak in

at the green-

(isotropic) clusters whose variation in size is small and

noise principle frequency is affected by several factors.

whose separation between nearest clusters is also isotropic Consider first blue noise, where the separation between

with small variation.

minority pixels should have some variation. The wave-

B. Spatial Statistics

lengths of this variation, in blue noise, should not be

significantly longer than

as this adds low-frequency

If we assume a stationary and isotropic green-noise

pattern, the pair correlation will have the form of Fig. 11

spectral components to the corresponding dither pattern

given the following:

[12], causing

to appear more white than blue. The same

1) daughter pixels, on average, will fall within a circle

holds true for green noise with large variations in cluster of radius

centered around a parent point such that

separation leading to a spectral peak at

which is

(the area of the circle with radius

is equal

not sharp but blurred as the variation in separation adds

to the average number of pixels forming a cluster);

new spectral components to

. This whitening effect on

2) neighboring clusters are located at an average distance

is also created by increased variation in the size of clusters of

apart;

with excessively large clusters leading to low-frequency

3) as

increases, the influence that clusters have on

components and excessively small clusters leading to high-

neighboring clusters decreases.

frequency components. In summary, the sharpest spectral

The result is a pair correlation which has: 1) a nonzero

peak at

will be created when

is composed of round

component for

due to clustering; 2) a decreasing

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2435





(a)

(b)

Fig. 20.

Green-noise halftone statistics for: (a) g = 1=4 and (b) g = 1=2 using two hystereses and two error coefficients with H = 1 and 75% random hysteresis filter weights.

influence as

increases; and 3) peaks at integer multiples

pixels is used to vary the threshold-making minority pixels of

indicating the average separation of pixel clusters.

more likely to occur in clusters. Furthermore, the amount

Note that the parameter

is also indicated by a diamond

of clustering is controlled through the scalar constant

,

placed along the horizontal axis in Fig. 11.

the hysteresis constant, with large values of

leading

In the case of stationary and anisotropic green-noise

to large clusters and small values of

leading to small

patterns, the pair correlation will also be of the form of

clusters.

Fig. 11, but because clusters are not radially symmetric,

As mentioned previously, other techniques for creating

blurring occurs in

near the cluster radius

. In a

binary dither patterns with adjustable coarseness include

similar fashion, because the separation between clusters will Velho's and Gomes' digital halftoning along SFC's [9]

also vary with direction, blurring will occur at each peak

and Scheermesser's and Bryngdahl's digital halftoning with

in

located at integer multiples of

.

texture control [10]. SFC is a technique where a two-

dimensional (2-D) image is halftoned using a 1-D clustered-

C. Error Diffusion w ith Hysteresis

dot dithering approach which traverses the image along a

Although error diffusion is a good generator of blue

space filling curve such as the Peano, Hilbert, or Sierpinsky noise, the nature of green noise to cluster pixels makes error curve. By manipulating the maximum number of pixels

diffusion inappropriate. As an alternative, Levien [11] has that can form a cluster, the SFC technique can control the

proposed error diffusion with output-dependent feedback

amount of coarseness in resulting images, and unlike AM

(Fig. 12) where a weighted sum of the previous output

halftoning where the maximum number of pixels that can

2436

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





form a cluster limits the number of gray levels that the

pattern can represent, SFC diffuses quantization error from one cluster to the next. The result is a technique which

combines the benefits of aperiodic structure with those of

clustered dots.

Scheermesser's and Bryngdahl's technique attempts to

minimize the cost associated with a particular arrangement

of dots by iteratively turning pixels "on" and "off." The

cost associated with a particular arrangement of dots is

determined by two factors. The first is an image met-

ric which measures the difference between the perceived

images of the binary halftone pattern and the continuous

tone original. The second cost is a numerical texture

metric which measures the relative orientation of minority

pixels. Scheermesser's and Bryngdahl's technique is able

to produce adjustable coarseness by adjusting the weight of the cost of the texture metric versus the perceived image

metric.

There are, of course, many other algorithms which pro-

duce stochastic arrangements of minority pixel clusters

(green noise). The reason that this paper chooses to look at Levien's technique is because it is ideally suited, based so much on Floyd's and Steinberg's original error-diffusion

algorithm [16], to present an evolution of the blue-noise

model originally described by Ulichney [12]-having, like

(a)

the green-noise model itself, blue noise as a limiting case

. Furthermore, as will be shown, error diffusion

with output-dependent feedback creates patterns which may

be described as "good" green-noise patterns, i.e., exhibiting sharp peaks in both the spectral

, and spatial

domains.

Mathematically, Levien's algorithm is defined as follows:

(17)

(18)

(19)

where

and

are the hysteresis and error-diffusion

coefficients, respectively, such that

.

In the following sections, we look at some variations to error diffusion with output-dependent feedback and compare

their results in terms of the spatial and spectral domain

metrics discussed previously. These variations include the

following.

1) Hysteresis constant. Of paramount importance, the hysteresis constant controls the amount of clustering,

and therefore it influences greatly the green-noise

characteristics of resulting dither patterns. It is this

(b)

parameter

that allows for tunable coarseness.

2) Choice of error/hysteresis filter. Within the context Fig. 21.

Green-noise halftones of a grayscale ramp using two

hystereses and two error coefficients with: (a) H = 3=2 and (b) of Levien's definition of error diffusion with output-H = 3=2 with 50% random hysteresis filter weights.

dependent feedback, many choices exist for the error

filter, and coupled with the hysteresis filter, even more

3) Stochastic error/hysteresis filter perturbation. Intro-possibilities can occur. For computational efficiency,

duced by Ulichney [12] to improve the blue-noise

as small a filter as possible is always preferred.

characteristics of error diffusion, random noise can be

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2437





(a)

(b)

Fig. 22.

Green-noise halftone statistics for: (a) g = 1=4 and (b) g = 1=2 using two hystereses and two error coefficients with H = 3=2.

added to the weights of both the error and hysteresis

In addition to the serpentine raster scan, a small hysteresis filters. This same process is described in Section III-constant

produces patterns for small

which

C for error diffusion with four weights, and unlike the

are very similar to traditional blue noise [Fig. 15(a)], but as previous two variations, the application of filter per-increases and approaches

, the amount of clustering

turbation to either the error diffusion or the feedback

also increases, thereby shifting the spectral content from

coefficients is new to Levien's technique.

blue to green (Fig. 16). This behavior is indicated by

for

and

where, for blue noise,

1) Two Hystereses and Two Error Weights: The

scheme

and

, and for this arrangement of weights,

originally proposed by Levien [11], which uses only

and

(strictly less than

). Furthermore,

two hystereses and two error weights (Fig. 13), has

low computational complexity but coupled with a left-

as seen in Fig. 15(b), adding a perturbation of 50% ran-

to-right raster scan (Fig. 14) yields poor results due to

domness to the error filter weights breaks up many of

strong diagonal texture patterns, thereby making mandatory

the directional artifacts, which creates patterns with re-

alternate scanning paths such as the serpentine (left-to-right duced diagonal correlation and increased variation in cluster then right-to-left) raster scan, which is used for this and size. Resulting patterns (Fig. 17), therefore begin to appear all other arrangements of filter weights. Note that in these noisy as the spectral peaks in

at

are

and the following figures, the binary dither patterns are

blurred. Also note that as a result of increased variation

shown under ideal printing conditions unless otherwise

in cluster size, the peaks and valleys of

are also

noted.

blurred. This further indicates a dither pattern with spatial 2438

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





(a)

(b)

Fig. 23.

Green-noise halftone statistics for: (a) g = 1=4 and (b) g = 1=2 using two hystereses and two error coefficients with H = 3=2 and 50% random hysteresis filter weights.

and spectral characteristics more similar to white-noise

occur without perturbation at this low gray level, but also halftones.

without this perturbation, patterns exhibit strong direction In contrast to a low hysteresis constant, Fig. 18 shows

artifacts-creating diagonal textures. The perturbation of

the resulting patterns generated using a moderate hysteresis hysteresis weights breaks up many of these textures, espe-constant

. Specifically, in Fig. 18(a), patterns

cially near

.

exhibit clustering at all gray levels with a well-defined

As a final demonstration of using two hystereses and two

boundary formed between clusters. As is exhibited in

error weights, Fig. 21 shows the resulting dither patterns

Fig. 19 for

where

, this

using a high hysteresis constant

. Illustrated in

clustering behavior is indicated by the sharp drop in

Fig. 22 for

and

, the variation in cluster size

for

and by the ripple formed in

with

has increased relative to

and

as clus-

peaks occurring at integer multiples of

.

ters are beginning to form long horizontal bars-creating

Figs. 18(b) and 20 illustrate the whitening effect of

textures which are not diagonal but horizontal. Adding a

adding a perturbation of 75% randomness to the hysteresis

perturbation of 50% randomness to the hysteresis weights

weights. For each instance of

, an increased variation in

[Fig. 21(b)] in this scheme breaks up many of these hori-

cluster size is clearly visible, most noticeably for

zontal artifacts-reducing

for all gray levels but also

where clusters of 1, 2, and 3 pixels can be seen

whitening the spectral content slightly (Fig. 23).

throughout the pattern. Without perturbation at

,

2) Four Hysteresis and 12 Error Weights: As an investi-clusters are commonly composed of two pixels with only

gation of the effects of different filter weights, Fig. 24

a few composed of one. Rarely do clusters of three pixels

shows the combination of the Floyd-Steinberg weights

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2439





Fig. 24.

An arrangement of four hysteresis and 12 error-diffusion

coefficients.

[16] as the hysteresis filter and the Stucki weights [18]

as the error filter. Using a small hysteresis constant

, Fig. 25(a) shows the resulting gray scale ramp which

exhibits a larger degree of clustering relative to using two hystereses and two error weights with equivalent

. Due

to very small variation in cluster size, this method leads to patterns with very sharp spectral peaks in

, as seen

in Fig. 26, but at

, the clusters form a pattern with

very distinct horizontal artifacts.

Figure 25(b) shows the same combination of weights

but with an added perturbation of 30% randomness to

the hysteresis weights and 30% randomness to the error

weights. In this case, as seen in Fig. 27, many of the

horizontal artifacts are broken up, and at the same time

only a small amount of spectral whitening has occurred in

(a)

patterns for

and

.

For a comparison of the principle frequencies and average

cluster sizes for patterns generated using the described

variations, see the table of Fig. 28.

V.

DOT GAIN

As stated in the introduction, dot gain is the increase

in size of the printed dot relative to the intended size, and whether a function of the mechanical printing process or the optical properties of paper, dot gain is present in all printing processes. Therefore, it cannot be eliminated. Assuming

that the process is repeatable, dot gain can be anticipated and controlled [7], but in printing processes which are not repeatable [7], compensating for dot gain is a far more

difficult task. In these instances, it may be more desirable to use a scheme which resists dot gain, thereby making

the printed output more robust to variations in the printing process. An example where dot gain is anticipated and

therefore compensated for is Pappas' and Neuhoff's [19]

modified error-diffusion algorithm employing a circular

dot-overlap model which models printed dots as round dots

which overlap neighboring pixels, thereby causing printed

halftones to appear darker than the original fraction of ones.

Although for many printers the circular dot-overlap

model is invalid [20], it illustrates an important aspect

of dot gain with regards to digital halftoning. That being

the relationship between dot gain and the perimeter-to-area (b)

ratio of printed dots with higher ratios leading to higher

average dot gain. In dispersed dot halftones (FM), this ratio Fig. 25.

Green-noise halftones of a grayscale ramp using four

hysteresis and 12 error coefficients with: (a) H = 1=2 and (b) is much higher than that for clustered dot halftones, which H = 1=2 with 30% random error filter weights and 30% random creates higher gain for dispersed dots [4]. It is for this

hysteresis filter weights.

2440

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998



(a)

(b)

Fig. 26.

Green-noise halftone statistics for: (a) g = 1=4 and (b) g = 1=2 using four hystereses and 12 error coefficients with H = 1=2.

reason that green-noise halftoning which clusters pixels is noise image [Fig. 29(b)]. Also note that for blue noise,

less susceptible to the effects of dot gain, and by varying isolated white pixels are nearly erased as neighboring black the size of clusters, resulting patterns can be optimized for dots almost completely overlap the white pixels.

specific dot gain characteristics with large clusters reserved for printing processes with high variation from printed

VI. CONCLUSION

dot-to-printed dot and small clusters reserved for printing In addition to introducing green noise, this paper has

processes with low variation.

introduced the use of the two statistics for the analysis of Green noise offers a wide range of halftone renditions;

digital halftoning techniques: 1) the pair correlation and 2) therefore, selecting the optimal hysteresis constant for error the directional distribution function. Being spatial-domain diffusion with output-dependent feedback is an important

statistics, both offer a more intuitive understanding of the problem that must be addressed based on specific printer

underlying point process compared to the conventional

traits. As a demonstration of the advantages of using

spectral-domain statistics: the radially averaged power spec-green noise instead of blue, Fig. 29 shows the resulting

trum and the anisotropy. Also in this paper, we have

images using the circular dot-overlap model where the

presented models in the spatial and spectral domain of both ratio of the diameter of a printed dot to the minimum

blue-noise and green-noise dither patterns, and using such, distance between samples is 10:6. Note that the blue-noise

we have analyzed several variations to error-diffusion with image [Fig. 29(a)] appears much darker than the green-output-dependent feedback-remarking on the attributes of

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2441





(a)

(b)

Fig. 27.

Green-noise halftone statistics for: (a) g = 1=4 and (b) g = 1=2 using four hystereses and 12 error coefficients with H = 1=2 and 30% random error filter weights and 30% random hysteresis filter weights.

each variation. In effect, we have demonstrated a wide

range of modifications that may be used to optimize a

green-noise processes for specific printer traits.

Fig. 30 shows a comparison of five major classes of

dither patterns: 1) white-noise; 2) blue-noise; 3) green-

noise; 4) dispersed ordered dither; and 5) clustered-dot

dither. Ulichney [12], who makes a similar comparison,

writes that blue noise is pleasant because it does not add

a structure of its own to an image as do dispersed-order

dither and clustered-dot dither, both being arranged to form a regular pattern. Blue noise also does not look too "noisy"

or uncorrelated as does white noise.

Green noise, being a stochastic patterning of dots, also

does not add structure to an image as does dispersed-

Fig. 28.

Table showing the principle frequency fg and the av-

erage number of pixels per cluster

M for several configurations

ordered dither or clustered-dot dither. It also does not

of error diffusion with output-dependent feedback employing a appear noisy or uncorrelated as does white, but green

serpentine raster scan.

2442

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 30.

Sample halftone patterns of: (a) white-noise; (b)

blue-noise; (c) green-noise; (d) dispersed-dot ordered; and (e) clustered-dot ordered dithering under (left) ideal printing conditions and (right) with circular dot-overlap model.

(a)

reproducing continuous tone images due to the increased

spatial resolution which it achieves, but when printing

conditions are not ideal, printing distortions such as dot-

gain make clustered-dithering techniques such as green

noise preferable to blue.

In closing, we add that the impact of blue noise on digital halftoning has been wide spread and has triggered many

advancements. In particular, the blue-noise mask [21] has

greatly decreased the computational complexity of dithering with blue noise. Equivalent developments can be made for

green noise, as is noted in [22] for the green-noise mask.

REFERENCES

[1] V. Ostromoukhov, P. Emmel, N. Rudaz, I. Amidror, and R.

D. Hersch, "Dither algorithms for variable dot-size printers," in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Processing, 1996, pp. 553-556.

[2] I. Amidror, R. D. Hersch, and V. Ostromoukhov, "Spectral analysis and minimization of moire patterns in color separation," J.

Electron. Imaging, vol. 3, pp. 295-317, July 1994.

[3] P. Fink, PostScript Screening: Adobe Accurate Screens.

Mountain View, CA: Adobe Press, 1992.

[4] M. Rodriguez, "Graphic arts perspective on digital halftoning," Proc. SPIE, Human Vision, Vision Processing and Digital Display V, vol. 2179, pp. 144-149, Feb. 1994.

[5] D. Blatner and S. Roth, Real World Scanning and Halftones.

Berkeley, CA: Addison-Wesley, 1993.

[6] T. P. Blumer, "Image display apparatus and method using (b)

halftone super cells," U.S. Patent 5 287 195, 1994.

[7] M. A. Coudray, "Causes and corrections of dot gain on press,"

Fig. 29.

The resulting images using: (a) blue noise and (b) green

Screen Printing: J. Technol. Manage. , vol. 86, pp. 18-26, Aug.

noise using a circular dot-overlap model such that the ratio of 1996.

the diameter of a printed dot to the minimum distance between

[8] R. A. Ulichney, Digital Halftoning.

Cambridge, MA: MIT

samples is 10 : 6.

Press, 1987.

[9] L. Velho and J. M. Gomes, "Digital halftoning with space filling noise, being composed of pixel clusters, does increase

curves," Comput. Graphics, vol. 25, pp. 81-90, July 1991.

[10] T. Scheermesser and O. Bryngdahl, "Control of texture in image the visibility of the halftone pattern. Given ideal printing halftoning," J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, vol. 13, pp. 1645-1652, Aug.

conditions, blue noise is, therefore, the obvious choice for 1996.

LAU et al. : GREEN-NOISE DIGITAL HALFTONING

2443





[11] R. Levien, "Output dependant feedback in error diffusion Gonzalo R. Arce (S'82-M'82-SM'93) received

halftoning," in Proc. IS&T's 8th Int. Congr. Advances in the B.S.E.E. degree with highest honors from

Non-Impact Printing Technologies, Oct. 1992, pp. 280-282.

the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, in 1979

[12] R. A. Ulichney, "Dithering with blue noise," Proc. IEEE, vol.

and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical

76, pp. 56-79, Jan. 1988.

engineering from Purdue University, West

[13] N. A. C. Cressie, Statistics for Spatial Data.

New York: Wiley,

Lafayette, IN, in 1980 and 1982, respectively.

1983.

Since 1982, he has been with the Department

[14] D. Stoyan, W. S. Kendall, and J. Mecke, Stochastic Geometry of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the

and Its Applications.

New York: Wiley, 1987.

University of Delaware, Newark, where he is

[15] T. Mitsa and K. J. Parker, "Digital halftoning technique using currently Professor and Associate Chair. He

a blue noise mask," J. Opt. Soc. Amer. , vol. 9, pp. 1920-1929, frequently serves as consultant to industry and

Aug. 1992.

government in the areas of digital printing, image processing, and digital

[16] R. W. Floyd and l. Steinberg, "An adaptive algorithm for spatial communications. His research interests include robust and nonlinear signal gray-scale," Proc. SID, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 75-78, 1976.

processing and its applications, wireless communications, image and video

[17] P. Hall, Introduction to the Theory of Coverage Processes.

signal processing, secure multimedia communications, and halftoning. He New York: Wiley, 1988.

holds two U.S. Patents.

[18] P. Stucki, "Mecca-a multiple-error correcting computation al-Dr. Arce has served as Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS

gorithm for bilevel image hardcopy reproduction," IBM Res.

ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, Guest Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE

Lab., Zurich, Switzerland, Tech. Rep. RZ1060, 1981.

P

[19] T. N. Pappas and D. L. Neuhoff, "Printer models and error ROCESSING, and Guest Editor for Optics Express. He received an NSF

Research Initiation Award in 1983 and the Best Paper award from the diffusion," IEEE Trans. Image Processing, vol. 4, pp. 66-79, U.S. Army's ATIRP Federated Laboratory Consortium in 1997. He is a Jan. 1995.

[20] T. N. Pappas, C. Dong, and D. L. Neuhoff, "Measurement Fellow of the Center for Advanced Studies at the University of Delaware.

of printer parameters for model-based halftoning," J. Electron.

He is a member of the Digital Signal Processing Technical Committee of Imaging, vol. 2, pp. 193-204, July 1993.

the Circuits and Systems Society and a Member of the Board of Nonlinear

[21] K. J. Parker and T. Mitsa, "Method and apparatus for halftone Signal and Image Processing Society.

rendering of a gray scale image using a blue noise mask," U.S.

Patent 5 341 228, 1994.

[22] G. R. Arce and D. L. Lau, "Method and apparatus for producing halftone images using a green noise mask," U.S. Patent pending.

Neal C. Gallagher (S'72-M'75-SM'85-F'87)

received the Ph.D. degree from Princeton Uni-

versity, Princeton, NJ, in 1974.

He is the Charles Evans Black Professor and

Chair of Electrical Engineering at the University

of Delaware, Newark. Currently he is working

on the use of finite element methods to solve

Daniel L. Lau received the B.S.E.E. degree

electromagnetic problems, the use of rank order

with highest distinction from Purdue University,

filtering techniques to improve the performance

West Lafayette, IN, in 1995. He is currently

of phase locked loops, the modeling of cellular

working towards the Ph.D. degree in electri-

automata using wave theory, and the autofocus

cal engineering at the University of Delaware,

problem in SAR. Before joining the University of Delaware he was on the Newark.

faculty at Purdue University for 18 years. Prior to that he was a Faculty M

He has worked in image processing at the

ember at Case Western Reserve University. Over the years has published Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. His

in the areas of stochastic processes, quantization and source coding, research interests include image processing, dig-electromagnetic theory, and microwave components and optics.

ital halftoning, multimedia, nonlinear filters, and

Dr. Gallagher is presently Editor of Applied Optics Information Pro-art conservation. He has written several articles

cessing. He is a Fellow of the IEEE for his work in nonlinear digital on nonlinear filters for signal and image processing, and he has consulted signal processing, and he is a Fellow of the Optical Society of America with industry on halftoning and digital printing. His most recent work has (OSA) for his work on diffractive optics. He has held various editorial focused on accurate color reproduction.

and committee positions in the IEEE, OSA, and SPIE.

2444

PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, VOL. 86, NO. 12, DECEMBER 1998





