220

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENERGY CONVERSION, VOL. 16, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2001

A New Approach to Direct Torque Control of

Induction Motor Drives for Constant Inverter

Switching Frequency and Torque Ripple Reduction

Yen-Shin Lai , Member, IEEE and Jian-Ho Chen

Abstract-In this paper a new approach to direct torque control For digital implementation, the system sampling frequency

(DTC) of induction motor drive is presented. In comparison with

for the calculations of torque and flux should be very fast in

the conventional DTC methods [1], [22] the inverter switching fre-order to provide good tracking performance and limit the errors

quency is constant and is dramatically increased, requiring neither

of torque and flux within the specified bands, respectively. The

any increase of the sampling frequency, nor any high frequency

dither signal. The well-developed space vector modulation tech-

inverter switching frequency, which varies with speed of drives

nique is applied to inverter control in the proposed DTC-based

and the associated error bands, is very low in comparison with

induction motor drive system, thereby dramatically reducing the

the system sampling frequency; a sampling frequency of 40 kHz

torque ripple and speed ripple. As compared to the existing DTC

gives the inverter switching frequency about 3 kHz as shown in

approach [2], [23] with constant inverter switching frequency, the

[7]. Although the inverter switching frequency can be increased presented new approach does not invoke any concept of deadbeat

control, thereby dramatically reducing the computations. Experi-

by mixing high frequency dither signals with the error signals of

mental results are illustrated in this paper confirming that the pro-

torque and flux, respectively, the inverter switching frequency

posed DTC method has the above-mentioned features even at the

is not constant for small error bands [8] and the difficulty of low speed range down to

1 r/min.

designing inverter output filter becomes difficult. For the DTC-

Index Terms-Direct torque control, induction motor drives, based drives, the torque ripple is significantly for not invoking

inverter.

the zero inverter switching states; especially at motor start-up

[9] or under transient state [10].

I. I

Alternatively, space vector modulation (SVM) modulator

NTRODUCTION

is incorporated with direct torque control for induction motor

IT IS well known that the basic concept of direct torque drivesasshownin [2], [23],[11] toprovideaconstantinverter control of induction motor drives is to control both stator

switching frequency. Noting that the torque ripple and noise

flux and electromagnetic torque of machine simultaneously.

issue for this SVM-based DTC approach are significantly

As demonstrated in [1], [22], [3]-[6], both torque and flux of a improved for invoking zero inverter switching state within

DTC-based drive are controlled in the manner of closed-loop

every switching period of inverter control. In [2], [23] a system without using current loops in comparison with the con-deadbeat controller is used to generate the voltage command of

ventional vector-controlled drives. In principle, the DTC-based

SVM modulator, which requires calculating several complicate

drives require the knowledge of stator resistance only, and

equations on-line. In [11], a predictive controller is used thereby decreasing the associated sensitivity to parameter

to generate the voltage command for inverter control using

variations. Moreover, the DTC-based drives do not require ful-

space vector modulation technique. However, the predictive

filling the coordinate transformation between stationary frame

controller consists of a deadbeat controller, a feed forward

and synchronous frame, in comparison with the conventional

controller and two integrators, and no experimental results are

vector-controlled drives.

presented in the paper.

Since a DTC-based drive [1], [22] selects the inverter

In this paper, it is intended to solve the issues associated

switching states using switching table, neither current con-

with the conventional switching-table-based DTC drives as

trollers nor pulse-width modulation (PWM) modulator is

mentioned previously in this section. It will be demonstrated

required, thereby providing fast torque response. However, this

in this paper that the inverter switching frequency is increased

switching-table-based DTC approach is accompanied by some

requiring neither the increase of sampling frequency, nor any

disadvantages; more details are described as follows.

dither high frequency dither signal. And, the inverter switching

frequency is kept constant without invoking any complicate

deadbeat controller. Furthermore, the well-developed space

Manuscript received June 21, 1999. This work was supported by the National Science Council under Grants NSC 88-2213-E-027-014.

vector modulation technique is applied to inverter control

Y.-S. Lai is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taipei in the proposed DTC-based induction motor drive system,

University of Technology, 1, Sec. 3, Chung-Hsiao E. Rd., Taipei, Taiwan.

thereby dramatically reducing the torque ripple and speed

J.-H. Chen is with the Institute of Mechatronic Engineering, National Taipei University of Technology, 1, Sec. 3, Chung-Hsiao E. Rd., Taipei, Taiwan.

ripple. Experimental results derived from a test drive system

Publisher Item Identifier S 0885-8969(01)07334-X.

are presented to firmly support the claims of this paper.

0885-8969/01$10.00 © 2001 IEEE





LAI AND CHEN: A NEW APPROACH TO DIRECT TORQUE CONTROL OF INDUCTION MOTOR DRIVES

221

II. THEORY

A. Machine Modeling

An induction motor is modeled using voltage and flux equa-

tions which are referred to a general reference frame, denoted

by the superscript " " and are shown as follows [12], [13].

Stator Voltage Equation:

(1)

Rotor Voltage Equations:

(2)

Stator Flux Equation:

(3)

Rotor Flux Equation:

(4)

Mechanical Equation:

Fig. 1.

Block diagram of the conventional direct torque control of induction

(5)

motor drives.

(6)

The electromagnetic torque is calculated by (15), which is

derived by (12).

By referring to a stationary frame, denoted by the superscript

" ," which is with

-axis attached on the stator winding of

(15)

phase " ," the mathematical equations of induction motor can

be rewritten as follows.

Fig. 1 shows the direct block diagram of the conventional

direct torque control for induction motor drive. As shown in

Stator Voltage Equation:

Fig. 1, the inverter switching states are selected according to the

(7)

errors of the torque and flux, which are indicated by,

and

Rotor Voltage Equations:

, respectively. Noting that

(8)

(16)

Stator Flux Equation:

(17)

(9)

Rotor Flux Equation:

where

(10)

Mechanical Equation:

(18)

(11)

Table I shows the associated inverter switching states for two-

level inverter control of the conventional direct torque control

(12)

approach. As shown in Table I, the inverter switching states are

determined by the errors of torque and flux, and the position of

Substituting (9) and (10) into (12), yields

stator flux, which is denoted by

and given by

(13)

(19)

where

total leakage factor,

.

The definition of sectors is shown in Fig. 2, in which the

position relationship between stator voltage vector and stator

B. The Conventional Direct Torque Control Approach

flux vector is clearly identified. As shown in Fig. 2, the stator

The stator flux is by (14), which is derived from (7).

flux vector,

, lags the associated stator voltage vector,

, by

90 degrees if the voltage drop across the stator resistance shown

in (14) is negligible.

(14)

Noting that a speed controller can be added to Fig. 1 to gen-

erate the torque command, and therefore fulfill a DTC-based ad-

where

and

indicate the measured stator voltage and cur-

justable speed drive as illustrated in Fig. 3. As shown in Fig. 3,

rent, respectively.

the shaft speed of induction motor drive can be derived using





222

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENERGY CONVERSION, VOL. 16, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2001

TABLE I

SWITCHING TABLE FOR THE CONVENTIONAL DIRECT TORQUE CONTROL OF INDUCTION MOTOR DRIVES

The phase voltages and the associated stator voltage vector

shown in (14) are estimated using the scheme shown in [14],

[15] and are summarized in (20) and (21).

(20)

(21)

where

Fig. 2.

Relationship between stator voltage vector and flux vector.

,

, and

phase voltages;

,

, and

denote the inverter switching states, in

which

(

, if the upper

leg switch is on and

(

,

if the upper leg switch is off;

is the dc link voltage;

,

two-axis stator voltage in the stationary

frame.

Noting that the field oriented control approach invokes the

concept of transforming the stationary quantities into syn-

chronous ones and orienting the referred flux along the -axis

of the synchronous frame. More details about the discussion of

field oriented control can be found in [12], [13]. In contrast the direct torque control (DTC) shown in Fig. 3 [1], [22], [2], [23],

[3]-[11] does not invoke any of the above-mentioned works for field oriented control; more details about the DTC can be

found in [1], [22], [2], [23], [3]-[11]. As shown in [1], [22],

[2], [23], [3]-[11] "

," the position of stator flux, is essential

to inverter switching control.

C. Conventional Space Vector Modulation Techniques

Fig. 3.

Block diagram of a DTC-based adjustable speed drive.

As shown in Fig. 2, the switching states of inverter control in-

clude eight switching states; six of them, (100), (010), (001), de-

an encoder in a closed-loop system or by the speed estimation

noted by

, and (110), (011) and (101), represented using

,

skills in a sensorless system.

are named active switching states, and (000) and (111), denoted





LAI AND CHEN: A NEW APPROACH TO DIRECT TORQUE CONTROL OF INDUCTION MOTOR DRIVES

223

goals can be achieved by selecting the inverter switching states

according to the errors of torque and flux.

Therefore the main theme of direct torque control is to regu-

late the torque and magnitude of flux directly without invoking

any concept of field orientation. Following this essential con-

cept, Fig. 5 shows the block diagram of the new DTC-based

induction motor drives. As shown in Fig. 5, two proportional-

integral (PI) type controllers regulate the flux amplitude and

torque, respectively. Therefore, both the torque and the mag-

nitude of flux are under control, thereby generating the voltage

command for inverter control. Noting that no decoupling mech-

anism is required since the flux magnitude and torque can be

regulated by the PI controllers. Experimental results derived

from a test induction motor drive will be given later in this paper

to strongly support this point of view.

As shown in Fig. 5, the inverter is controlled by the SVM

technique [16], [24] using Symmetrical Regular-Sampling technique [18]. Therefore, the inverter switching frequency is significantly increased, and the associated torque ripple and current

Fig. 4.

(a) Switching patterns. (b) Sampling instants for SVM technique.

harmonics can be dramatically reduced, in comparison with the

conventional switching-table-based DTC drives. More details

by

and

, respectively. The vector times associated with the

of these merits of the new DTC drives over the conventional

switching states are shown in (22) [16], [24] and the switching approach are clearly analyzed in next section and will be sup-pattern in one carrier period is shown in Fig. 4.

ported by the experimental results shown later in this paper.

E. Advantages of the New DTC-Based Drives

It is well known that for conventional DTC approach, no in-

verter leg changes switching state during a sampling period. Due

to this fact, the inverter switching frequency is less than that of

(22)

sampling frequency and the associated torque ripple is also significant for low sampling frequency control. As reported in [7],

where

,

.

the sampling is increased up to 40 kHz (25 sec of sampling pe-

Noting that zero switching states, (000) and (111), are in-

riod) at the cost of using dedicated high performance hardware;

cluded in the switching pattern in a sampling period as shown

however, the inverter switching frequency is about 3 kHz.

in Fig. 4. In a sampling period the zero switching states, (000)

Fig. 6 illustrates the PWM pulses for the SVM technique

and (111), with the same vector times, are placed at two edges,

[16], [24] using Asymmetrical Regular-Sampling technique. As respectively. It has been demonstrated [17] that the Total Har-shown in Fig. 6, the inverter switching frequency is 50% of

monic Distortion (THD) associated the space vector modula-

sampling frequency. For Asymmetrical Regular-Sampled SVM

tion technique is approximate to that of an optimal PWM tech-

technique, the zero switching states, (000) and (111), are placed

nique; and therefore the torque ripple can be reduced in compar-

in the edges of switching pattern in every sampling period. It

ison with other three-phase modulation techniques. In the linear

has been demonstrated [17] that the Total Harmonic Distortion modulation range, the inverter switching frequency is constant

(THD) of the space vector modulation technique with switching

and is 50% of the sampling frequency. The details about these

patterns as shown in Fig. 6, is approximate to that of an optimal

advantages will be highlighted later in this paper as compared

PWM technique; and therefore the torque ripple can be reduced.

with the switching table technique of the conventional DTC-

To increase the inverter switching frequency for the same

based system.

sampling frequency, the Symmetrical Regular-Sampled SVM

technique with switching patterns as shown in Fig. 7 is used

D. New DTC-Based Drives

for inverter control of the new DTC-based drive. The inverter

It is well known that the principle of vector control of induc-

switching frequency is constant and is equal to sampling

tion motor drive is to align the flux and torque current along

frequency.

the -axis and -axis of the reference fame, respectively. And

Therefore, for the same sampling frequency, in comparison

therefore, the torque can be controlled by the associated current

with the conventional switching-table-based DTC drive, the new

component, once the flux is kept constant. In contrast, as men-

DTC-based drive dramatically increases the inverter switching

tioned previously in this paper, the fundamental idea of direct

frequency; and thereby significantly reducing the torque ripple.

torque control is to control both the torque and the magnitude of

Experimental results will be shown later in this paper to confirm

flux within the associated error bands in real time. These control

this analysis.





224

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENERGY CONVERSION, VOL. 16, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2001

Fig. 5.

Block diagram of the proposed DTC-based induction motor drives.

Fig. 6.

Illustration of PWM pulses of inverter control, asymmetrical

regular-sampled SVM technique. (a) Switching patterns. (b) Sampling instant.

Fig. 8.

Stator flux estimation for implementation.

about the specification and parameters of the induction motor

are listed in the Appendix.

It is well known that both switching losses and sampling fre-

quency of controller of drives limit the inverter switching fre-

quency. The discussion about these two topics and the related

solutions can be found in [20]-[22]. Since the inverter switching frequency for conventional DTC schemes depends upon the hys-teresis band and is not constant, the experimental results for

comparisons are conducted based upon the same sampling fre-

quency of controller of drives.

Noting that the accuracy of the estimated stator flux using

(14) will be affected by the initial conditions caused by the pure

integral operation. The signals of voltage and current are domi-

nated by the harmonics at low speed range, thereby significantly

Fig. 7.

Illustration of PWM pulses of inverter control for the new DTC-based

affecting the accuracy of estimation. A stator flux estimation

drive system; asymmetrical regular-sampled SVM technique. (a) Switching

patterns. (b) Sampling instant.

scheme as shown in Fig. 8 and (23), which is similar to that pro-

posed in [19] for rotor flux estimation, is used to overcome the above-mentioned issue for stator flux estimation.

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

As shown in Fig. 8 at high speed range, the estimated stator

A PC-based induction motor drive is used as the test system.

flux is approximate to the value shown in (14) while without in-

The system consists of a 586 PC, an IGBT inverter, and an

voking any integral operation. At low speed range, in which the

induction motor with a 1000 pulses/rev encoder. More details

current and voltage signals are dominated by the harmonics, the





LAI AND CHEN: A NEW APPROACH TO DIRECT TORQUE CONTROL OF INDUCTION MOTOR DRIVES

225

(a)

(a)

(b)

(b)

(c)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 10.

Experimental results of the proposed DTC system. (a) Speed

(d)

response; x-axis in sec, y-axis in rpm. (b) Estimated torque; x-axis in sec, y

Fig. 9.

Experimental results of the conventional DTC system. (a) Speed

-axis in Nt-m. (c) Spectrum of inverter switching pulses; x-axis in kHz, y-axis response; x-axis in sec, y-axis in rpm. (b) Estimated torque; x-axis in sec, in volt. (d) Phase current; x-axis in sec, y-axis in amp.

y-axis in Nt-m. (c) Spectrum of inverter switching pulses; x-axis in kHz, y-axis in volt. (d) Phase current; x-axis in sec, y-axis in amp.

oscilloscope: Tektronix TDS 460 A

voltage differential probe: SI-900

command value of stator flux is used instead, thereby providing

Fig. 9 shows the experimental results for the conventional

satisfied accuracy even at low speed range.

DTC system as shown in Fig. 3; the error bands of torque and

flux are 2% of rated torque and nominal flux value, respectively.

The experiment is conducted at a profile of 1600 r/min and a

step load, 1.8 N-m which is 45% of rated torque, is applied at

sec. The sampling frequency is 5 kHz and the inverter

switching frequency is less than 5 kHz as shown in Fig. 9(c).

As shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), the speed and torque ripple is

significant.

(23)

Fig. 10 shows the experimental results for the proposed DTC

system as shown in Fig. 5. The experimental is conducted using

where

and

cut-off frequency of filter.

the same profile as that for the experimental results shown in

The experimental results are measured using the following

Fig. 10. Noting that the SVM technique is Symmetrical SVM

equipment.

technique, which gives the inverter switching frequency equal





226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENERGY CONVERSION, VOL. 16, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2001

(a)

Fig. 12.

Experimental results of the proposed DTC system; 61 r/min; x-axis

in sec, y-axis in rpm.

As shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b), the torque and speed ripples

are trivial, and the inverter switching frequency is constant as

demonstrated in Fig. 11(c).

(b)

The performance of the proposed DTC drive system at low

speed region has been further explored by experimental results.

The experiment is conducted at a speed profile of

1 r/min. A

step load, 50% of rated torque, is applied at

sec. Fig. 12

shows the associated experimental results. As shown in Fig. 12,

the speed ripples is trivial even at such a low speed range.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a new direct torque control method is pre-

(c)

sented and its merits over the conventional DTC approach

are confirmed by the experimental results. The features of

the proposed direct torque control method include 1) pro-

viding constant inverter switching frequency, 2) dramatically

increasing the inverter switching frequency without requiring

any high frequency dither signal, 3) significantly reducing the

torque and speed ripple. Experimental results are illustrated in

this paper confirming that the proposed DTC method has the

above-mentioned features even at the low speed range down to

1 r/min.

(d)

The proposed DTC approach is verified using a two-level in-

verter system, it can also be applied to a three-level inverter

Fig. 11.

Experimental results of the proposed DTC system; 6900 r/min.

(a) Speed response; x-axis in sec, y-axis in rpm. (b) Estimated torque; x-axis system and multi-level inverter system. The authors wish to re-in sec, y-axis in Nt-m. (c) Spectrum of inverter switching pulses; x-axis in port more details of the experimental results in these aspects in

kHz, y-axis in volt. (d) Phase current; x-axis in sec, y-axis in amp.

the near future.

APPENDIX

to that of sampling frequency. As shown in Fig. 10(c), the first

List of motor specification and parameters

dominant harmonic cluster locates at 5 kHz, indicating that the

inverter switching frequency is 5 kHz.

220 V, 3 , 1 HP 0.75 KW, 4 poles, 1680 rpm.

In comparison with Fig. 9(c) for the conventional DTC

Motor Parameters

system, the proposed method indeed increases the inverter

switching frequency. As shown in Fig. 10(c), the inverter

switching frequency is constant and depends on the sampling

H

frequency only. As shown in Fig. 10(a) and (b), the speed and

H

torque ripple is dramatically reduced as compared with those

kg-m

shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b) for the conventional DTC system.

Nt-m/rad/s

Similar remarks can be derived for other speed range and load

conditions.

REFERENCES

The second experiment is conducted at a speed profile of

[1] I. Takahashi and Y. Ohmori, "High-performance direct torque control of 900 r/min. The profile accelerates from 0 r/min to 900 r/min

induction motor," IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 257-264, in 1 s and decelerates from 900 r/min to

900 r/min during 4 s

1989.

[2] T. G. Habetler, F. Profumo, M. Pastorelli, and L. M. Tolbert, "Direct to 6 s. A step load, about 50% of rated torque, is applied at

torque control of induction machines using space vector modulation,"

sec. Fig. 11 shows the associated experimental results.

IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1045-1053, 1992.

LAI AND CHEN: A NEW APPROACH TO DIRECT TORQUE CONTROL OF INDUCTION MOTOR DRIVES

227

[3] M. Depenbrock, "Direct-self control of inverter-fed induction machine,"

[18] S. R. Bowes, "New sinusoidal pulsewidth-modulated inverter," Proc.

IEEE Trans. Power Electrons, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 420-429, 1988.

IEE, vol. 122, no. 11, pp. 1279-1285, 1975.

[4]

, "Direct self control for high dynamics performance of inverter

[19] T. Ohtani and H. Takasaki, "High performance vector control of in-

feed a.c. machines," ETZ Archiv. , vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 211-218, 1985.

duction motor using torque-producing current," in IPEC Conference

[5]

, "Direct-self control of the flux and rotary moment of a rotary-field

Record, 1990, pp. 61 and 84-90.

machine," US Patent 4 678 248, 1987.

[20] Y. S. Lai and S. R. Bowes, "A universal space vector modulation based

[6] P. Tiitinen, "The next generation motor control method, DTC direct

on regular-sampled pulse-width modulation," in Proc. of the IEEE

torque control," in Proceedingss of the IEEE Intl. Conf. on Power Elec-IECON, 1996, pp. 120-126.

tronics, Drives, and Energy Systems for Industrial Growth, 1996, pp.

[21]

, "Investigations into optimising high switching frequency reg-

37-43.

ular-sampled PWM for drives and static power converter," in IEE Proc.

[7] J. N. Nash, "Direct torque control, induction motor vector control

Electr. Power Appl. , vol. 143, 1996, pp. 281-292.

without an encoder," IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , vol. 33, no. 2, pp.

[22] I. Takahashi and Y. Ohmori, "High-performance direct torque control 333-341, 1997.

of induction motor," in Conference Record IEEE IAS Annual Meeting,

[8] T. Noguchi, M. Yamamoto, S. Kondo, and I. Takashi, "High frequency

1985, pp. 495-502.

switching operation of PWM inverter for direct torque control of induc-

[23] T. G. Habetler, F. Profumo, M. Pastorelli, and L. M. Tolbert, "Direct tion motor," in Conference Record IEEE IAS Annual Meeting, 1997, pp.

torque control of induction machines using space vector modulation,"

775-780.

in Conference Record IEEE IAS Annual Meeting, vol. 1, 1991, pp.

[9] M. P. Kazmierkowski and A. B. Kasprowicz, "Improved direct torque

428-435.

and flux vector control of PWM inverter-fed induction motor drives,"

[24] H. W. van der Broeck, H. C. Skudelny, and G. V. Stanke, "Analysis and IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 344-349, 1995.

realization of a pulsewidth based on voltage space vectors," IEEE Trans.

[10] D. Casadei, G. Grandi, G. Serra, and A. Tani, "Switching strategies in Ind. Appl. , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 142-150, 1988.

direct torque control of induction machines," in Proc. of the Internal Conference on Electrical Machines (ICEM), 1994, pp. 204-209.

[11] G. Buja, D. Casadei, and G. Serra, "Direct stator flux and torque control of an induction motor: Theoretical analysis and experimental results,"

in Proceedings of the IECON '98, vol. 1, 1998, pp. T50-T64.

Yen-Shin Lai (M'96) received the M.S. degree from the National Taiwan Uni-

[12] G. R. Slemon, "Modeling of induction machines for electric drives,"

versity of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, and the Ph.D. degree from IEEE Trans. Ind. App. , vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1126-1131, 1989.

the University of Bristol, Bristol, England, U.K., both in electronic engineering.

[13] Y. S. Lai, "Modeling and vector control of induction machines-A new In 1987, he joined the National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, unified approach," in Proc. of the IEEE Power Engineering Society

as a Lecturer and is currently a Professor.

Winter Meeting, 1999, pp. 47-52.

He received the John Hopkinson Premium for the session 1995/1996 from the

[14] T. C. Green and B. W. Williams, "Derivation of motor line-current wave-Institute of Electrical Engineers (IEE).

forms from the dc link current of an inverter," Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng. , pt.

His research interests include design of microprocessor-based systems, de-B, vol. 136, no. 4, pp. 196-204, 1989.

velopment of PWM techniques, and drives and converter control.

[15] Y. Xue, X. Xu, T. G. Habetler, and D. M. Divan, "A stator flux-ori-

ented voltage source variable-speed drive based on dc link measure-

ment," IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 962-969, 1991.

[16] H. W. van der Broeck, H. C. Skudelny, and G. V. Stanke, "Analysis and realization of a pulsewidth based on voltage space vectors," in IEEE IAS

Jian-Ho Chen received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering, from the Na-Ann. Meet. , 1986, pp. 244-251.

tional Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, and is cur-

[17] S. R. Bowes and Y. S. Lai, "The relationship between space vector mod-rently working for the M.S. degree in the Institute of Mechatronic Engineering, ulation and regular-sampled pulse-width modulation," IEEE Trans. In-National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, Taiwan.

dustrial Electronics, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 670-679, 1997.

His research interests include inverter control and PC-based control.





